                                     Yutong Zhang z5526932


 1. Literature Review
1.1 SAE Interpretability
In recent years, Sparse Autoencoders (SAEs) have emerged as a key tool for enhancing the
interpretability of large models (Cunningham et al., 2023; Klindt et al., 2025). Their core idea
is to decompose highly superimposed, polysemantic features in fixed Transformer
representations into a set of monosemantic basis vectors via sparse reconstruction, thereby
creating a human-interpretable "feature-concept" dictionary.

SAE demonstrates direct practical value in steering scenarios. Existing work shows that
steering vectors constructed from SAE features can effectively modulate model behavior—
without requiring additional supervisory data—for tasks such as safety alignment, role
control, and reasoning path intervention (Arad et al., 2025; Chalnev et al., 2024; Wang et al.,
2025). Compared to traditional fine-tuning or RLHF methods, this approach offers greater
controllability and interpretability. Meanwhile, SAE concepts have been extended to
multimodal and vision-language models to decompose representational structures in vision-
content joint spaces (Pach et al., 2025). These advances collectively indicate that improving
SAE decomposition quality is not only an interpretability challenge but also directly
determines the upper bound of model controllability.

To achieve this goal, existing research predominantly focus on refining SAE architectures
themselves, such as Gated SAEs (Rajamanoharan et al., 2024), Top-K SAEs (Gao et al.,
2024), and Routed SAEs (Shi et al., 2025). These approaches enhance feature selection
through gating, sparse selection, or dynamic routing mechanisms. Fundamentally, this
direction improves SAEs' fitting capacity to pre-existing representations. However, a
relatively underexplored avenue involves starting from the Transformer’s representation
generation mechanism itself to make it suitable for posterior sparse decomposition.

What-where decoupling is one approach to make sparse decompositions more suitable for
posterior analysis (O’Neill et al., 2024). Chughtai et al. (2024) found that in the early layers of
GPT-2 small ( specifically, the residual stream at layer 0 ), positional and content features
are almost completely decoupled. In this stage, sparse autoencoders (SAEs) can clearly
recover the one-dimensional structure corresponding to positional encodings in the latent
space, such as helical or periodic patterns. However, as depth increases, what-where
decoupling rapidly deteriorates: positional information and semantic content are
progressively superimposed within the residual stream, forming highly entangled
representations, alongside more pronounced superposition and polysyntheticity
(Cunningham et al., 2023; Klindt et al., 2025). In these deeper layers, SAEs typically require
substantially larger dictionary sizes, stronger sparsity constraints, and even more
sophisticated post-alignment strategies to recover interpretable features (Karvonen et al.,
2025; Minegishi et al., 2025).

However, it is crucial to emphasize that the entanglement between positional and content
representations serves important purposes. Existing research shows that what-where
entanglement is a key source of the model's expressive power. Bricken et al. (2023) argue
that in finite-dimensional representation spaces, models inevitably rely on superposition—
where different factors share representational subspaces—to efficiently encode numerous
semantic features. Similarly, Su et al. (2021) demonstrate that appropriate positional-content
coupling is essential for complex reasoning tasks. Thus, simply pursuing complete
decoupling may compromise model performance.

Notably, different positional encoding methods will lead to different what-where entanglement
pattern that significantly alter the spectral structure of attention logits (e.g., singular value
distributions and approximate Toeplitz properties), thereby influencing information mixing
patterns (Gu et al., 2025). For instance, multiplicative positional encodings like RoPE induce
a degree of "spectral shrinkage," resulting in smoother attention patterns that enhance
training stability and generalization performance. However, this smoothing can also enhance
what-where entanglement, making posterior decomposition more challenging. In other
words, by modifying the RoPE design, we can modulate what-where entanglement to
optimize attention patterns—preserving RoPE's advantages while maximizing interpretability
for posterior decomposition.

The need to balance detanglement and entanglement also becomes important in multimodal
scenarios. In computer vision, spatial position is a prerequisite for content —pixel topology
errors disrupt geometric relationships, so visual encoding must preserve tight entanglement
between spatial structure and content representations (Yao et al., 2025; Chen et al., 2025).
In contrast, positional information in LLMs exhibits greater independence: the semantics of
the same token vary little across positions ( Devlin et al., 2019 ). This endows language
features with inherent decoupling potential. Multimodal models, however, face dual
challenges: fine-grained alignment between local visual regions and textual descriptions, and
architectural coordination between textual priors and visual positional encodings (Li et al.,
2025; Huang et al., 2025).

This naturally leads to an appealing idea: if positional-content entanglement has an invertible
structure, we could construct an exact bijection to transform entangled representations into
decoupled ones without losing expressive power. This approach is formally analogous to
normalizing flows, which achieve lossless separation of latent variables through invertible
transformations (Kobyzev et al., 2019; Kingma & Dhariwal, 2018).

However, this idea is difficult to realize within the Transformer framework. First, multi-layer
residual structures fundamentally perform information compression and redistribution rather
than strict information preservation (Elhage et al., 2022). Second, superposition represents
irreversible feature overlap in low-dimensional spaces, where distinct semantic factors
exhibit lossy overlapping in their representations (Olah et al., 2020; Bricken et al., 2023).
Thus, positional-content entanglement in Transformers is inherently an irreversible mixture
encoding. From this perspective, the true role of SAEs is to perform approximate sparse
decomposition of mixed features within the given representation space, rather than strict
factor decoupling (Cunningham et al., 2023; Gao et al., 2024). This suggests that, instead of
pursuing theoretically infeasible complete reversible decoupling, a more practical direction is
to develop sparsity-optimized decomposition strategies.

In other words, our goal is not to eliminate entanglement, but to reshape it: enabling
representations that maintain model performance while achieving both efficient compression
and posterior separability. By optimizing Transformer positional encodings, we can engineer
positional-content coupling with more regular statistical structure, thereby reducing the
difficulty of SAE-based approximate decoupling.

1.2 Positional Encoding
Current Transformer positional encoding schemes are rich and diverse, including Sinusoidal
PE (Vaswani et al., 2017), Learned PE (Devlin et al., 2018; Dosovitskiy et al., 2020), T5-style
relative biases (Raffel et al., 2020), ALiBi (Press et al., 2021), and RoPE (Su et al., 2021).
RoPE, due to its excellent length extrapolation capability and training stability, has become
the mainstream choice for SAE analysis (Cunningham et al., 2023; Gu et al., 2025; Zhang et
al., 2026).

Mechanistically, RoPE achieves multiplicative positional-content coupling through complex-
plane rotations, producing approximately Toeplitz attention patterns and exhibiting spectral
contraction effects (Wang et al., 2025). This results in smoother attention distributions,
enhancing training stability and positional generalization. Empirical studies also reveal clear
functional differentiation among attention heads in RoPE models: some heads specialize in
content matching, while others are more sensitive to relative positions (Gu et al., 2025).

However, this "functional differentiation" does not equate to true representational decoupling.
RoPE implicitly embeds positional information through phase rotations, leaving position and
semantics highly entangled in the representation space (Wang et al., 2025). Analyses show
that RoPE's improvements primarily manifest in smoother mixing patterns, rather than
fundamentally separating "what (content)" from "where (position)" (Gopalakrishnan et al.,
2025).Thus, PoPE (Gopalakrishnan et al., 2025) proposes a more radical improvement: in
polar coordinates, it explicitly decouples magnitude (content) from phase (position),
structurally eliminating the what-where confound. Unlike RoPE's implicit coupling, PoPE
maps the two to orthogonal geometric degrees of freedom, achieving clear division at the
representation level.

Empirical validation shows that PoPE's structural adjustments not only preserve most of
performance but deliver systematic improvements across position-sensitive tasks (perplexity,
downstream metrics, zero-shot length extrapolation), consistently across model scales
(124M–774M) (Gopalakrishnan et al., 2025). This indirectly confirms that redesigning
positional-content coupling is both feasible and beneficial. However, the interaction
mechanism between PoPE and SAEs remains unclear. Existing SAE research (Cunningham
et al., 2023; Klindt et al., 2025) treats positional encodings as fixed background, overlooking
their potential as key variables for interpretability. A critical question remains unanswered:
how does SAE decomposition behavior respond when the entanglement structure of
underlying representations is altered through positional encoding changes?

From prior analysis, SAE decomposition of lossy mixture representations critically depends
on feature separability. Thus, PoPE's structural decoupling is expected to significantly
reduce SAE training difficulty, yielding:

    Improved feature monosemanticity
    Reduced reliance on large dictionaries and strong regularization
    Enhanced steering effectiveness
    Meanwhile, SAE benchmarks (Karvonen et al., 2025) provide quantitative evaluation
    metrics. This paper therefore conducts the first systematic study of SAE performance
    under PoPE vs. RoPE, verifying whether positional encoding design—through
    decoupling positional and content features—can enhance interpretability while
    maintaining task performance.

 2. Theoretical Investigations
Unlike computer vision, natural language exhibits the property of translation invariance: the
core semantic meaning of a word generally remains consistent regardless of its position
within a sentence. This suggests that Large Language Models (LLMs) should prioritize
capturing relative positional dependencies over fixed absolute positions.

Both ALiBi and RoPE aim to eliminate the dependency on absolute positions within the
attention mechanism, ensuring that attention scores are primarily driven by the relative
relationships between tokens. While ALiBi achieves this via translational bias (applying linear
penalties based on distance to the attention scores), RoPE employs rotational
transformation (embedding relative position information directly into the vector space through
geometric rotation). Unlike the original Transformer's sinusoidal positional encoding, which
lacks an explicit mechanism for modeling relative distances, these approaches enable
attention scores to be a function of the distance between tokens. This reliance on relative
positioning is essential for improving long-range dependency modeling and is a key factor
enabling the impressive length extrapolation capabilities observed in modern LLMs.

The primary limitation of RoPE lies in its implementation within the Cartesian coordinate
system, where the 'what' (semantic content) and the 'where' (positional information) become
inherently entangled through the rotation matrix operation. When calculating Query-Key
matches, the model often struggles to disentangle whether the attention score is derived
from semantic similarity or positional alignment. The derivation of RoPE is as follows:

 1. We get word embedding input x with d dimensions in position p.
        p        p    p        p
    x       = [x , x , . . . , x ]
                 1    2        d


 2. Then, split it into 2D vector.
        p         p   p   p          p           p          p              p
    x       = (x , x , x , . . . . . x ) => (x         ,x         ,....x           )
                  1   2   3          d           1:2        3:4            d−1:d
 3. We apply Rotation matrix R for every group. The i                  θ                                     th
                                                                                                                  group is as follow:
           p                                      p                                                                p
       q 2i−1                                 x 2i−1                   cos(pθ i )        − sin(pθ i )             x 2i−1
   (                ) = Rθ (                              ) = (                                            )(              )
                p                                     p                                                                p
           q 2i                                   x 2i                 sin(pθ i )            cos(pθ i )            x 2i

                                 −2(i−1)/d
   θ i = 10000

 4. We make it complex form. ^i means imaginary number. The i                                                                  th   pair of dimension is:
       p             p                   p                                               p        p           p
   x i = (x 2i−1 , x 2i ) => (complex f orm)C i                                              = x 2i−1 + ^
                                                                                                        ix 2i


 5. According to Euler's formula: e                                            ^
                                                                               iθ
                                                                                    = cosθ + ^
                                                                                             isinθ        , we can represent the the after rotation
   i th        pair as a complex multiplication:
           ′
       p                 p            ^
                                      ipθ i
   Ci           = Ci ⋅ e


 6. Matrix R could be regarded as ratotating degree θ in complex space. The ratation
                         θ


    parameter in complex soace is:
    ^
               = cosθ + ^
    iθ
   e                    isinθ

 7. Expanding formula in part 3, we can get:
       p                     p                p                 p
   q                +^
                     iq           = (x                    +^
                                                           ix        ) ⋅ (cos(pθ i ) + ^
                                                                                       i sin(pθ i ))
       2i−1                  2i               2i−1              2i


 8. If complex a + ^ib = c + ^id, then a = c, b = d, so can we obtain the rotated components:
       p                  p                                     p
   q 2i−1 = x 2i−1 cos(pθ i ) − x 2i sin(pθ i )
               p          p                                p
           q        = x           sin(pθ i ) + x                cos(pθ i )
               2i         2i                               2i


   where, x represent what, pθ represent where, indicating “what - where” entanglement.
                         p

                         2i                                                i


   this will lead to:
               Semantic Contamination: When performing attention calculations, the model must
               essentially 'undo' the rotation to extract the underlying semantic information and
               recover the original token embedding 𝑥. While theoretically trivial, this reversal
               process becomes computationally non-trivial as dimensionality scales; the model
               incurs additional overhead to disentangle the intertwined semantic and positional
               features.
               Informational Redundancy: Positional information persists as a persistent
               'perturbation' across every dimension of the vector. During the computation of Query-
               Key dot products, this introduces significant 'noise'—irrelevant to semantic matching
               —that is purely positional in nature, thereby cluttering the attention scores with
               extraneous signals."

PoPE represents each scalar channel as a complex number in polar form, where
the magnitude carries content and the phase carries position.

 1. We get word embedding input x with d dimensions at position p :
       p             p            p                p
   x       = [x , x , … , x ]
                     1            2                d


 2. Unlike RoPE, PoPE does not group every two dimensions into a 2D Cartesian vector.
    Instead, it treats each scalar feature as one channel and converts it into the magnitude of
   a complex number :
       p             p            p                p
   x       = [x , x , … , x ]
                     1            2                d


 3. PoPE maps each scalar channel into a non-negative magnitude using the softplus
    function σ(x) = ln(1 + e ), which allows that value to be interpreted as a magnitude in
                                                                x
   polar coordinates. μ means magnitude.
                                                 p
       p            p                        x
   μ       = σ(x ) = ln(1 + e                    i
                                                     )
       i            i


 4. PoPE assigns position only to the phase. For the i           th
                                                                      channel, the phase is determined
   purely by the token position p and the channel frequency θ ​, so content no longer shifts
                                                                           i


   the phase. ϕ means phase
       p
   ϕ       = pθ i
       i


   θi = θ
              (i−1)/d
                             ( θ usually use 10000 )
 5. Now each channel is written directly in polar-complex form. Its magnitude μ ​stores    p

                                                                                           i


   content, and its phase ϕ ​stores position
                                                         p

                                                         i
                         p
       p       p    ^
                    iϕ           p   ^
                                     ipθ i
   q       = μ e         i
                             = μ e
       i       i                 i


 6. According to Euler's formula, the complex number can be expanded into Cartesian
   coordinates, but unlike RoPE, this expansion starts from a magnitude-phase
   representation rather than from a 2D semantic pair
    ^
           = cos θ + ^
    iθ
   e                 i sin θ

       p       p
   q       = μ ( cos(pθ i ) + ^
                              i sin(pθ i ))
       i       i


   If we write the real and imaginary parts explicitly, they are obtained from the same
   magnitude μ and the same position phase pθ . This is the key structural difference from
                             p

                             i                               i


   RoPE: the semantic quantity enters only through the magnitude, not through the phase
   offset.

Although PoPE elegantly disentangles the 'what' and 'where' components, it introduces
several limitations compared to RoPE:

   Lack of Hardware/Kernel Compatibility: RoPE is deeply integrated into the current
   software ecosystem. Mainstream attention kernels (e.g., FlashAttention) are highly
   optimized for the RoPE-based rotation operator. Transitioning to PoPE would necessitate
   the development of custom, hardware-optimized kernels, resulting in significant
   deployment and integration costs.
   Computational Overhead: The requirement for per-channel non-linear activation (e.g.,
   Softplus) introduces extra arithmetic operations for every token. While seemingly
   marginal, this increases the computational burden on the GPU's arithmetic logic units
   during the attention forward/backward pass.
   Over-constrained Inductive Bias: PoPE’s strict decoupling of content and position may
   be counter-productive in complex reasoning tasks. By imposing a rigid geometric
   separation, the model may be deprived of subtle what-where interactions that are often
   essential for high-level semantic reasoning, potentially creating an 'upper bound' on
   performance in tasks requiring intricate logic. And that's what I want to make a
   difference.

 3. Problem Definition
RQ1: Performance Stability
Does PoPE outperform RoPE in language model training and downstream tasks?
RQ2: Decoupling Effectiveness
Does PoPE achieve stronger content-position decoupling?

RQ3: Interpretability Improvement
Does PoPE enable SAEs to learn more monosemantic features?

RQ4: Mechanistic Impact
How does positional encoding affect attention logits' spectral structure (Toeplitz properties)?

Then to conclude:
Key Hypotheses to Test

 1. Does what-where disentanglement harm language model training efficiency? If yes,
   how?
 2. Does what-where disentanglement yield purer semantic features in SAE training? If yes,
    how?

This systematic comparison will clarify PoPE's practical value and inspire future positional
encoding designs.

 4. Task Flow in progress
Phase 1: Model Construction (Weeks 1-3) Completed
Limited by computing resources, we only train a clean 90M Toy Transformer from scratch
with switchable RoPE/PoPE implementations to validate pipeline feasibility and test PoPE's
positional processing hypothesis.
Remark: I planned to monkey patch Llama model and inject PoPE into it. But
different PE will lead to very bad performance.


  # Data Preparation
  DATA_CFG = SimpleNamespace(
      dataset = "wikitext",
      config = "wikitext-103-raw-v1",
      key = "text",
      raw_text_samples = 30000,
      train_blocks = 1500,
      valid_blocks = 300,
      seq_len = 1024,
      tokenizer = "gpt2",
      eos_join = False,
      seed = 42,
  )

  DATA_RES = {
      vocab_size = 50257,
      total_token_used = 1891328,
      raw_text = 30000,
      non_empty_texts = 19357,
         used_texts = 14926,
  }


  # Model Construction
  MODEL_CFG = SimpleNamespace(
      n_layers = 12,
      d_embed = 512,
      n_heads = 8,
      d_ff = 2048,
      dropout = 0.1,
      seq_len = DATA_CFG.seq_len,
      # Extrapolation test is not being considered at this time.
      lr = 3e-5,
      vocab_size = DATA_RES["vocab_size"]
  )

  MODEL_RES = {
      RoPE_para = 89343057, # about 90M
      PoPE_para = 89346129, # about 90M
  }


Phase 2: Train & Evaluate (week3-6) Completed

      Stability Analysis: Compare training loss curves and gradient stability between the two
      architectures.
      Performance Evaluation: Benchmark models on language modeling (perplexity) and
      zero-shot length extrapolation tasks.


  TRAIN = SimpleNamespace (
      steps = 70000, #2000比较好
      batch_size = 24,
      seq_len = MODEL.seq_len,
      save_interval = 10000,
      log_interval = 200,
      data_type = "bfloat16",
      warmup = 2000
  )
Loss Curve:
 1. attn_entropy: Compute the Shannon entropy of each query’s attention distribution by
    treating its normalized attention weights over all keys as a probability distribution. A lower
   entropy indicates that attention is more concentrated on a few positions, while a higher
   entropy indicates a more dispersed attention pattern.
               N
   H = −∑            a i loga i
               i=1


   ai   is the attention weight at position i, N is the number of tokens paid attention to.
 2. avg_attn_distance: Compute the attention-weighted average token distance, which
    reflects the model’s average contextual span. A larger value indicates a stronger
    preference for long-range dependencies, whereas a smaller value indicates a stronger
    preference for local dependencies.
                       N
   Distance = ∑ i=1 a i d i

   di   is the distance between query word and the key word
 3. attn_heatmap: High responses near the diagonal usually indicate that the model tends to
    focus more on adjacent or nearby tokens.




Phase 3: SAE Training & Core Metrics (Weeks 6-8) Partly Completed
Train SAEs ( not top-k SAE) with identical configurations on matched RoPE/PoPE models
across early/mid/late layers. Collect metrics as follow:

   Reconstruction Error
   L0 Norm
   Dead Features


  SAE_CFG = SimpleNamespace(
      activation layer = "residual after block"
      dictionary size = 4096
      L1 coefficient = 1e-2
      epochs = 400
      learning rate = 2e-3
      batch size = 2048
      validation row cap = 8192 # sampling size of SAE validation set affects
  stability of MSE/nz.
  )
 Model                   Val MSE                       L0-Norm rate
 RoPE                    0.0261                        8.59%
 PoPE                    0.0216                        6.59%


From the current simple metrics, PoPE shows relatively low ValMSE and L0-Norm, which to
some extent supports our hypothesis.




   Correlation: measures the degree of linear relationship between features; lower values
   indicate weaker linear entanglement.
   Mutual Information: measures the mutual information between features; lower values
   indicate weaker nonlinear dependence and a greater degree of independence.

Phase 4: Disentanglement Benchmark (Weeks 9-11) Partly Completed
Accoding to Bilal Chughtai et al. (2024), we use the Disentanglement Probe test, there are
several important metrics as follow:

     2
   R tok  : Indicates how single SAE feature could predict the semantic
     2
   R pos   : Indicates how single SAE feature could predict the position




Phase 5: LLM-Assisted SAE Latent Interpretation (Weeks 11-13) Partly Completed
After each TopK-SAE training run, we use GPT-4o to automatically interpret all SAE latents
and use the outputs as a quantitative measure of interpretability. Specifically, for each latent,
we provide approximately 100–200 activation contexts together with their activation
strengths and token positions, then use a fixed prompt to have GPT-4o generate a brief
natural-language explanation of its activation pattern. Each latent is evaluated three times
and the results are averaged to reduce randomness. The GPT-4o outputs are then used to
assess the interpretation quality of each latent along the following three dimensions:

 1. Monosemanticity: whether the latent corresponds to a single, clear concept.
 2. Low-level vs. high-level feature type: whether the latent is more oriented toward low-level
   syntax, punctuation, or part-of-speech features versus high-level semantics, topics, or
   intents.
 3. Explaination examples: whether the examples are representative enough to cover
    activation patterns across multiple different contexts.
    Mainly refer work of Paulo et al., (2024) and Shi et al., (2025). Output samples are as
   follow:


  gpt-4o interpret result:
      AVG Monosemanticity Score: 3.95/5.00
      AVG Low-level Features Score: 4.14/5.00
      AVG High-level Features Score: 4.57/5.00
      API Cost: $0.4261
  Examples of Interpreted Features:
      Feature #5: low-level (Score:5) - The activations are consistently
  associated with relative pronouns "which" and "that," indicating a ...
      Feature #15: low-level (Score:4) - The activations are consistently
  associated with punctuation marks, particularly those used in dialo...
      Feature #23: low-level (Score:4) - The activations are consistently
  associated with the token "than," which suggests a pattern related ...


I have also started using GPT-4o to help interpret features, but the code for a rigorous
quantitative evaluation is not yet complete, so for now I will only present the following cases.

 5. Future Task flow
Phase 6: Strengthening Experimental Reliability (Weeks 13-16)

 1. Expand the experiments to larger datasets in contexts of varying complexity to test if
    what-where disentanglement will affect the learning ability in complex context?
 2. Validate the results across multiple random seeds.
 3. Introduce additional dynamic monitoring metrics to track representational changes,
    including:
       SAE feature reuse rate
       Monosemanticity growth
       Dead feature evolution

Phase 7: Steering and Causal Intervention (Weeks 16-20)
The final phase evaluates the practical utility of the disentangled features. We will construct
steering vectors from SAE features to intervene in model behavior, such as controlling
safety-related or stylistic outputs. We hypothesize that steering vectors derived from PoPE-
based SAEs will achieve higher precision and fewer unintended side effects, due to the
cleaner underlying feature space.

Phase 8: New Positional Embedding Design (Exploratory)
The insights from the preceding analyses may guide the design of a new positional
embedding scheme that preserves strong representational capacity during learning while
remaining more amenable to approximate decoupling in SAE analysis. Or combine different
what-where extent, using different positional encoding for different head. (It's still just an
imagination up to now; its feasibility hasn't been verified.)

I guess it may be helpful for multimodal tasks. But I need to read more and
test more to verify my conjecture

 6. Risk Mitigation
A potential risk is the trade-off between strict disentanglement and model expressivity.
Should PoPE show performance degradation in complex reasoning tasks, we will investigate
hybrid coupling strategies or partial disentanglement to strike an optimal balance between
interpretability and model capacity.

 7. Conclusion
This research project re-conceptualizes mechanistic interpretability not merely as a posterior
analysis task, but as a holistic problem requiring the co-design of model architectures and
interpretability tools. By demonstrating that PoPE significantly lowers the burden of SAE
feature decomposition, this work paves the way for more robust and controllable Large
Language Models and inspire creation of more powerful PE with higher SAE compatibility     。
 8. Appendix
 1. Cunningham et al., 2023, "Sparse Autoencoders Find Highly Interpretable Features in
    Language Models"
 2. Klindt et al., 2025, "Towards Monosemanticity in Neural Networks"
 3. Klindt et al., 2025, “From superposition to sparse codes: interpretable representations in
    large language models”
 4. Arad et al., 2025, “SAEs Are Good for Steering – If You Select the Right Features”
 5. Chalnev et al., 2024, “Improving Steering Vectors by Targeting Sparse Autoencoder
    Features”
                                                                              ‑
 6. Wang et al., 2025, “Improving LLM Reasoning through Interpretable Role Playing
    Steering (SRPS)”
 7. Pach et al., 2025, “Sparse Autoencoders Learn Monosemantic Features in
          ‑
    Vision Language Models”
 8. Rajamanoharan et al., 2024, "Improving Dictionary Learning with Gated Sparse
   Autoencoders"
 9. Gao et al., 2024, "Scaling and evaluating sparse autoencoders"
10. Shi et al., 2025, "Route Sparse Autoencoder to Interpret Large Language Models"
11. O'neill et al., 2024, "Disentangling Dense Embeddings with Sparse Autoencoders"
12. Chughtai et al., 2024, "Understanding positional features in layer 0 SAEs"
13. Karvonen et al., 2025, “SAEBench: A Comprehensive Benchmark for Sparse
    Autoencoders in Language Model Interpretability”
14. Minegishi et al., 2025, “Rethinking Evaluation of Sparse Autoencoders through the
        ‑
    Poly Semantic Evaluation Framework”
15. Gu et al., 2025, "Unpacking Positional Encoding in Transformers: A Spectral Analysis of
            ‑
   Content Position Coupling"
16. Bricken et al., 2023, "Towards Monosemanticity: Decomposing Language Models via
    Superposition"
17. Su et al., 2021, "RoFormer: Enhanced Transformer with Rotary Position Embedding"
18. Yao et al., 2025, "GeoPE:A Unified Geometric Positional Embedding for Structured
    Tensors"
19. Chen et al., 2025, "A 2D Semantic-Aware Position Encoding for Vision Transformers"
20. Devlin et al., 2018, "BERT: Pre-training of Deep Bidirectional Transformers for Language
    Understanding"
21. Vaswani et al., 2017, "Attention Is All You Need"
22. Li et al., 2025, "LIRA: Inferring Segmentation in Large Multi-modal Models with Local
    Interleaved Region Assistance"
23. Huang et al., 2025, "Revisiting Multimodal Positional Encoding in Vision-Language
    Models"
24. Kobyzev et al., 2019, "Normalizing Flows: An Introduction and Review of Current
   Methods"
25. Kingma & Dhariwal, 2018, "Glow: Generative Flow with Invertible 1x1 Convolutions"
26. Elhage et al., 2022, "Toy Models of Superposition"
27. Elhage et al., 2022, "A Mathematical Framework for Transformer Circuits"
28. Olah et al., 2020, "Zoom In: An Introduction to Circuits"
29. Devlin et al., 2018, "BERT: Pre-training of Deep Bidirectional Transformers"
30. Dosovitskiy et al., 2020, "An Image is Worth 16x16 Words"
31. Raffel et al., 2019, "Exploring the Limits of Transfer Learning with a Unified Text-to-Text
    Transformer"
32. Press et al., 2021, "Train Short, Test Long: Attention with Linear Biases Enables Length
    Extrapolation"
33. Wang, Guo et al., 2025, "Circle-RoPE: Cone-like Decoupled Rotary Positional
    Embedding for Large Vision-Language Models"
34. Gopalakrishnan et al., 2025, "Decoupling the "What" and "Where" With Polar Coordinate
    Positional Embeddings"
35. Shen et al., 2025, "VL-SAE: Interpreting and Enhancing Vision-Language Alignment with
    a Unified Concept Set"
36. Not cited but may useful Cui et al., 2024, "A phase transition between positional and
    semantic learning in a solvable model of dot-product attention"
